Documentation from OpenAI on how to generate Structured Outputs

Structured Outputs
Structured Outputs
Ensure responses adhere to a JSON schema.
Try it out
Try it out in the Playground or generate a ready-to-use schema definition to experiment with structured outputs.

Introduction
JSON is one of the most widely used formats in the world for applications to exchange data.

Structured Outputs is a feature that ensures the model will always generate responses that adhere to your supplied JSON Schema, so you don't need to worry about the model omitting a required key, or hallucinating an invalid enum value.

Some benefits of Structured Outputs include:

Reliable type-safety: No need to validate or retry incorrectly formatted responses
Explicit refusals: Safety-based model refusals are now programmatically detectable
Simpler prompting: No need for strongly worded prompts to achieve consistent formatting
In addition to supporting JSON Schema in the REST API, the OpenAI SDKs for Python and JavaScript also make it easy to define object schemas using Pydantic and Zod respectively. Below, you can see how to extract information from unstructured text that conforms to a schema defined in code.

Getting a structured response
from pydantic import BaseModel
from openai import OpenAI

client = OpenAI()

class CalendarEvent(BaseModel):
    name: str
    date: str
    participants: list[str]

completion = client.beta.chat.completions.parse(
    model="gpt-4o-2024-08-06",
    messages=[
        {"role": "system", "content": "Extract the event information."},
        {"role": "user", "content": "Alice and Bob are going to a science fair on Friday."},
    ],
    response_format=CalendarEvent,
)

event = completion.choices[0].message.parsed
Supported models
Structured Outputs are available in our latest large language models, starting with GPT-4o:

o3-mini-2025-1-31 and later
o1-2024-12-17 and later
gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 and later
gpt-4o-2024-08-06 and later
Older models like gpt-4-turbo and earlier may use JSON mode instead.

When to use Structured Outputs via function calling vs via response_format
Structured Outputs is available in two forms in the OpenAI API:

When using function calling
When using a json_schema response format
Function calling is useful when you are building an application that bridges the models and functionality of your application.

For example, you can give the model access to functions that query a database in order to build an AI assistant that can help users with their orders, or functions that can interact with the UI.

Conversely, Structured Outputs via response_format are more suitable when you want to indicate a structured schema for use when the model responds to the user, rather than when the model calls a tool.

For example, if you are building a math tutoring application, you might want the assistant to respond to your user using a specific JSON Schema so that you can generate a UI that displays different parts of the model's output in distinct ways.

Put simply:

If you are connecting the model to tools, functions, data, etc. in your system, then you should use function calling
If you want to structure the model's output when it responds to the user, then you should use a structured response_format